this video is about various near-earth
supernovae stars that explode and if
they do so close enough to earth they
could even have rather bad effects on
the environment here on planet NOW the
brightest supernova recorded in history
was in the year 1006 and goober goes by
the name SN 1006 for that reason it
first visible in April April 30th and
had a brightness at its peak of
magnitude minus 7.5 that's brighter even
than the planet Venus can ever be in the
sky so very bright indeed this guest
star as they named it was visible by
astronomers all over the world from
China Japan Iraq Egypt and indeed some
parts of Europe and we now know that
it's not really the appearance of a new
star but the catastrophic death of an
old one and the constellation it was
founding was a constellation of lupus
and that's rather a southerly
constellation so that's why you couldn't
see it from all over Northern Europe now
what we know had been happening was that
there was a white dwarf star and somehow
it acquired more matter I'm a
traditional way for this to happen is
for it to be in a binary system where it
has a red dwarf a red giant companion
which sheds material and that is sucked
into a spiral called an accretion disk
falling onto the white dwarf star and
gradually builds the mass of the white
dwarf star up and when that reaches a
certain limit called the Chandrasekhar
limit the upper bound for the mass of a
white dwarf star is just one point four
four times the mass of our Sun and it
can't handle any more than that then
they explode in a supernova called a
type one ace
and over the most powerful supernova of
all and this can heat the gas and
generate enormous shock waves and give
off an awful lot of gamma rays in the
process so you don't want one of these
going off near to you here's a
petroglyph from the Hohokam people who
lived around about that time and this
rock has been dated back to at the right
year and the drawings here on the rock
show this new star suddenly appearing in
the sky that wasn't Pillman in 65 that
we were able to track down the remnant
of this explosion in the sky and that
was pinned down initially by mill and
Gartner using the Parkes radio dish this
is the radio dish that was featured in
the film the dish which is all about how
that radio telescope was used to receive
the original Apollo 11 TV transmissions
from their moon landing and relay them
back to NASA and all of the difficulties
that they had in doing so good film
nowadays we've tracked it optically and
also we've got an x-ray picture of it on
the right there from the Chandra x-ray
telescope Illustrated at the top and the
red in the center there and the greeny
bits ah gas at millions of degrees
giving off lots of x-rays and then the
blue shell around the outside
that's high-energy electrons which give
off both x-rays and radio waves and
she's how come the Parkes dish was able
to pick it up it's about six point four
light-years across
and an estimated distance of 7,200
light-years from Earth that's quite a
long way and far enough away that whilst
it was very spectacular it didn't do
anybody any harm now slightly curiously
a twist on the story is that we've been
looking to see what happened to the
companion star
if the white dwarf star exploded what
happens usually is that the companion
star gets flung across the cosmos but we
can usually trace them back but so far
they haven't managed to find anything so
it's possible that actually this was the
collision the merger of two white dwarf
stars making it what's called a super
Chandrasekhar event so the overall power
output would have not been limited to
that one point four four solar masses
but potentially double that if two very
large white dwarfs managed to collide
with each other and completely
annihilate everything in the huge
explosion and that could be why we can't
find the evidence of a companion now in
terms of effects on earth from that far
away 7,200 light years the gamma rays
came across space and they had a small
effect which we've been able to detect
what happens is they hit the oxygen and
the nitrogen molecules in the upper
atmosphere split them apart and then
they recombine with each other to form
and oxides of nitrogen and that can have
a knock-on effect on the ozone layer and
on life now the only signs we've got of
this there are a signature in some ice
deposits in Antarctica from around about
the right time showing nitrate deposits
which can only really have originated
from there being quite a lot of oxides
of nitrogen in the atmosphere and then
they would dissolve in water and be
rained out or snowed out into the
Antarctic ice and they're recorded for
us to find them later
well a supernova that was sir very
widely spotted was Tycho's supernova
1572 just below the constellation of
Cassiopeia they're headed between
Cassiopeia and the pole star the North
Star and this appeared in November of
that year and is one of eight super
novae that have been recorded and by the
naked eye in history
here's an x-ray picture of the remains
of the exploded star again the gas
coming out in the center there and a
shell of high-energy electrons around it
giving off radio waves and x-rays it's
been seen optically since but it was
first detected again in radio as part of
the third Cambridge radio catalog hence
it's got the 3 C 10 designation is the
picture of it taking wise infrared
telescope up to the top right there you
can see the red expanding shell of gas
and material and his little page out of
Tycho Brahe haze book where he noted the
appearance of this extra star suddenly
and
it's marked as I on the chart there near
the top he wrote a whole booklet about
its as so widely studied was it
well this visible from Britain and even
the usually steadfast Queen Elizabeth
the first was quite concerned about this
sudden appearance and took advice from
her astrologer Thomas Allen about the
new star that had appeared in Cassiopeia
also from China from the Ming Dynasty of
the young emperor when li being told to
mend his ways as a result of his evil
omen in the sky I suspect his advisers
wanted to tell him that regardless and
it just used that as an excuse and this
is a plot of the light curve that's been
reconstructed from its and so we can see
how their brightness is decayed over
time and being able to track the peak
back to a magnitude of minus 4 for this
one so brighter than the planet Jupiter
but not as bright as Venus usually is
this one have we think tracked the
companion there is a sun-like star a
g-type star that has been tracked moving
very fast streaking away from the scene
of the crime at 136 kilometers per
second which is about four times the
speed that stars usually move at so it's
been slung out away from the site of the
supernova it's called Tycho ji because
it's a g-type sun-like star in terms of
these sorts of supernovae having any
effect on us of any measure on earth
usually they have to be within 30
light-years of us and we reckon we get
one every 240 million years now that's
actually the time roughly that the earth
and the Sun take to do one lap of the
Milky Way galaxy and since the Sun and
earth have existed it's been round
is it 13 laps of the galaxy and so
anyway such a supernova would produce
gamma rays
it would make nitrogen and oxygen into
oxides of nitrogen and thereby create
acid rain and deplete the ozone layer
and if it was in side that 30 light
years it would half the concentration of
the ozone layer which would be enough to
do some real damage it would expose us
to the harmful ultraviolet radiation
from the Sun and cosmic radiation as
well and of course the bottom end of the
food chain the plankton would be
particularly affected and it would upset
the whole of the marine ecosystem the
whole food chain would probably collapse
not only do you get that you get a
double whammy because about a hundred
thousand years later you would get hit
by a whole stream of energetic particles
that travelled across space from the
supernova and would do another round of
damage as well so the initial light and
gamma rays travel across space at the
speed of light the charged particles
come rather more slowly take a bit
longer to arrive now we've got various
bits of evidence of recent supernova
damage to the earth the signature is
usually in the form of iron 60 a
radioactive isotope of iron and doesn't
occur naturally on earth has a very
short half-life and so we can detect it
in recent sediments and some sediments
from the sea floor that are dated
between zero if they're at the top of
the sediment stack down to 13 million
years have been found to contain iron 60
and that's a clue that the planet Earth
was irradiated with gamma rays that
created this iron 60 out of the original
material plus we've also found again in
Antarctica samples of interstellar
dust with the iron signature in it the
iron 60 and they all add up to an event
nearby in around about the last 5
million years or so but there's also
evidence of much more serious events the
end of the Ordovician II era was brought
about 440 3.8 million years ago half of
all marine animals got wiped out and
it's probable that's the event that was
responsible was a nearby gamma-ray burst
from a very powerful supernova that gave
way to the Silurian error and the
trilobites were the winners they took
over several hundred million years
before they too came to a sticky end
well that's another story and so if we
look today it might stars and we look at
those that are candidates for exploding
as supernovae there's a number of them
here we've got six listed in an order of
distance from the top down now the
bottom two there are both bright stars
in the constellation of Orion
you've got Rigel 860 light-years away in
petal just six for two light-years from
the earth and if we just have a quick
look at those Rigel is the most massive
at eighteen solar masses Bettinger as
well it's somewhere between seven point
seven and twenty we're not quite sure
and then they get slightly less massive
to the next three which are all around
the ten mark if it's got a slash it
means there's a binary system so Spiker
is ten point two five for the larger
star and its companion is seven solar
masses but at least ten and twelve solar
mass stars are likely to explode and
they all of those explode as what's
called a type 2 supernova where the core
ends up having fused all the way through
to making iron in the
or and then can't go any further and
under under goes this core collapse to a
neutron star or a black hole and but the
process blows the rest of the material
the outer layers of the star apart as a
huge supernova but the top one I Cape
egg si is just a hundred and fifty
light-years from us and if you look at
the masses there's a binary star one
point six five and one point one five
and that is very like the Sirius system
the Sirius a there's a white star and
has a white dwarf companion Sirius B
this is very similar with a white star
with one point six five solar masses and
a white dwarf star of 1.15 and those
will explode as a type 1a supernova
probably so let's have a little bit more
detail about that let's look at Ike a
Pegasus I so we've got the the a type
main sequence star burning hydrogen in
its core 1.65 solar masses and the
little white dwarf companion with 1.15
solar masses and they are orbiting each
other just 19 million miles apart so
closer than mercury is to our Sun now
what's going to happen is that
eventually the white dwarf star will
start picking up mass from the ordinary
white star when that white star swells
up to become a red giant
it'll passing that's from one to the
other but I cap EGIS IB that's now a
white dwarf probably began life as a
much larger star with a mass of six to
ten times the mass of our Sun and being
more massive than its companion it will
rush through the stages of evolution
quicker it might start with more fuel
but they burn their fuel
disproportionately faster if they're
more massive because of a higher core
pressure
and temperature and so it evolved very
quickly through to the red giant stage
and then blew off its outer atmosphere
and condensed down to this 1.15 solar
mass white dwarf that's quite big for a
white dwarf they're only allowed to be
1.44 before they explode now its radius
is about point six that of the earth so
it's quite compact and the surface
gravity would be nine hundred thousand
times that of Earth so the escape
velocity will be a significant fraction
of the speed of light to get away from
this object it's quite a violent gravity
field and temperature of thirty five
thousand five hundred degrees Kelvin
meaning it's putting out very
high-energy ultraviolet light as well as
the visible light it's probably composed
of carbon and oxygen the massive star
would have formed a lot of helium and
then fused to helium to make carbon and
oxygen and then unless it had more than
eight solar masses it would have stopped
but if it was in the range eight to ten
then it can go on and fuse to create
oxygen and neon and magnesium in the
core so we don't quite know which of
those possibilities it has resulted in
but it does rather matter because in
future as I mentioned when I Cape egg si
a finishes its main sequence and swells
up to become a red giant
then material will be pulled across by
gravity over onto the white dwarf now
that'll make things very exciting
there'll be quite a number of
cataclysmic thermonuclear explosions on
the surface of the white dwarf as it
feeds and receives lots of hydrogen as
part of that gas stream but eventually
it'll build its mess up to the point
where gravity overwhelms its ability to
resist and it'll collapse
and results in a supernova now if it's a
carbon-oxygen white dwarf it'll be a
type 1a supernova and very big one
indeed and release all of that energy
it's one point four four solar masses
worth of energy out as this huge
explosion however if the original star
was that bit bigger and was in the 8 to
10 solar mass range then the white dwarf
will have a core of magnesium and neon
and rather than then exploding as a type
1a supernova it'll collapse further down
to form a neutron star and so the
supernova won't be anything like is
impressive but we really can't quite
tell which of those situations these
white dwarf star is in it's only 150
light-years from us which is not that
far but it's far enough it's beyond my
30 light year safety limit and we've got
about 5 million years before that a type
star enters the red giant face so plenty
of time before it's going to happen now
fortunately I Cape EGIS I as a system is
moving away from us and in five million
years time it turns out it will be 500
light years away so it'll increase the
distance to an even safer margin now
just to finish off with metal chairs and
also Rigel so let's have a little look
at Bethel just in particular it's a red
supergiant not very old 8 to 15 million
years we're not quite sure because we're
not quite sure of its mass and you know
640 light years from us as misbehaving
recently here's a couple of photographs
of the constellation of Orion and you
can see the red color of Bethel just at
the top left hand corner of Orion there
and you can see between the two
photographs how its dimmed down quite a
lot badly Beck
so large or we can use telescopes on
earth to image the size of the thing as
a disc rather than just see it as a
point of light and here's a couple of
high-resolution images showing how it
dimmed between a in December and January
and also how a cloud of dust appeared to
be going across in front of it in
December and we think it actually dust
at work here because whilst the graph
there shows the dimming in visual
appearance infrared telescopes that can
see straight through the dust and are
not affected by it couldn't really see
any significant change first time that
Bethel juice has had a wobble like this
and it appears there's some sort of
pattern to its variability so maybe
there's a large cloud of gas and dust
that's orbiting around it and
periodically dims it down as shown in
this chart here
now I mentioned the difficulty over its
mass we don't see any companion objects
orbiting around metal chairs and without
that it's very difficult to be precise
about the mass somewhere in that range
7.7 to 20 solar masses but there's very
significant that because between 7.7 and
10.5 it will not go on and form the
heavy elements on in the core and blow
up as a core collapse supernova it will
instead puff off its outer layers and
form a white dwarf either a carbon
oxygen white dwarf if it's at the light
end of that or a magnesium neon white
dwarf if it's at the heavier end of that
so three possible outcomes for what
metal gears might do but if it does it
it's going to be very spectacular is a
rendering of what I Ryan might look like
with metal just doing that incredible
explosion of a core collapse supernova
now the higher the mass of the stars the
shorter their life is they burn through
their fuel disproportionately quickly
and so the higher the mass the sooner it
is that it's going to undergo the
explosion and if it's a up at the top
end it'll probably be sometime in the
next 40 thousand years if it's nearer
the bottom end it could be a hundred
thousand or even a million years before
anything happens
and lastly to idle the other bright star
in Orion this is a blue supergiant eight
million years old and a little bit
further away 860 light years you can
compare it to the size of Bethel jeers
which has swelled up to a red
supergiant's because the stars in that
group they're roughly to scale the Sun
older barren and then Rigel Antares and
Bethel Jers in order of size now
Rigel has companions orbiting around it
we've been able to fix its mass at 21
solar masses and so it's more than
likely fusing helium in its core at the
moment with a hydrogen shell fusing over
the top of that and we can tell that
that's happening at the moment because
there's an increased amount of helium on
the surface and some carbon nitrogen and
oxygen forming there as well
suggesting that there's further stages
of the nuclear chain going on deep in
the core now eventually it'll run out of
fuel undergo a reorganization to a
supergiant's and become a yellow
supergiant first and then a red one and
finally die as a core collapse supernova
when it's exhausted all its possible
nuclear fusion options it's already lost
three solar masses since it was formed
and if it did blow up it would be nearly
three-quarters the brightness of the
full moon so spectacular would it be be
quite a sight and again we're not sure
but probably in the next 40,000 years or
so hasn't got that long left so that's
it that's the end of my talk about
various stars and nearby supernovae
do click the subscribe button if you
want to follow me and find out when
there are new videos coming on thank you
very much